Narrator: Now...
(chain snaps)
art: (bleep)! (bleep)! (bleep)!
Narrator: ...On "ice road
truckers"...
Darrell: Hammer down.
Time's slipping away.
Narrator: ...The race is on...
(thud)
darrell: Whoa!
Narrator: ...As a cold front
opens up some of the toughest...
Todd: It is slick.
(truck rattles)
narrator: ...Roughest trails
in the north.
Todd: Hang on!
Narrator: And the drivers
jump in...
Alex: I can hear the ice
cracking and popping.
Narrator: ...Feet first.
Alex: Whoa!
(wind gusts)
♪♪♪
(thud)
art: Whoa!
Narrator: It's the season
the ice road truckers
have always feared.
(truck rattles)
- holy (bleep)!
Narrator: Right from
the start...
- It's a race against time
right now.
Narrator: ...It's been a mad
dash to get loads delivered...
Art: Get the (bleep) out
of here!
Get the (bleep) away from me!
Narrator: ...As the record short
winter has created chaos.
(truck honks)
- whoa!
(skids)
narrator: El nino's warm
temperatures have created havoc
on trials and crossings.
- So far I'd say this
is the worst road yet.
Alex: This is a nightmare.
Narrator: And some roads...
Alex: Whoa!
Narrator: ...Haven't even
survived.
- I guess we can't go anywhere.
Narrator: But now...
A 24 hour cold front
has descended on the north
providing a brief window
to deliver supplies to villages
yet to receive a single haul.
So the drivers are gearing up
for the big push.
And first out of the gate...
Is darrell ward.
Darrell: All right,
I'm loaded for cat lake.
They just opened this road.
I definitely got a tight window
to get to cat lake and back.
I need to get in there
and get offloaded
and get the hell out of there.
Narrator: Darrell's hauling
the first load
to cat lake all season;
an urgent 18 ton haul
of insulation.
(engine hums)
- on the road to cat lake.
Narrator: But the 300 mile
route's no ordinary trail.
It's an obstacle course of
narrow passageways and bridges,
tight corners and steep hills.
- I'm lucky that this road's
opened.
Closed road means no loads.
(engine hums)
(truck rattles)
little rough and nasty.
time's slipping away.
Hammer down.
Narrator: But darrell's not the
only driver battling the clock.
100 miles to the northwest
in manitoba,
polar's nabbed a monster haul
with a tight deadline
and they've entrusted it
to ice road's legend,
alex debogorski.
(truck creaking)
- I'm over dimension
on big, tall and wide.
Narrator: Through the years...
Lisa: North bound long pipe
out of cold foot.
Narrator: ...The truckers have
been tasked
with hauling plenty
of unusual cargo.
Trucker: We're 22 feet wide.
Even things on the side of the
road you gotta watch out for.
Narrator: This 16 ton oversized
fuel tank
is no exception.
And it's giving the old pro
all he can handle.
- Presents a few challenges.
(truck rattles)
it's high, so it tends to rock.
(truck creaking)
it's round so it wants to, it
wants to roll back and forth.
(chains clink, groaning)
I guess you can call it
an unstable oversize load.
Narrator: The tank is due
in the town of norway house
by nightfall.
An 300 mile trail that just
opened just hours earlier.
- Of course this road's not
flat so it's back and forth.
Narrator: With warm
temperatures
expected to shut down
the path by morning
this is the only chance
to deliver the tank.
(creaking)
- oh, oh, oh, oh.
Narrator: But keeping the huge
cylinder secure
ain't gonna be easy.
- Oopsy daisy.
We got a hill.
Ahhhh. Oh!
(rattles)
oh, oh.
(chains clinking)
oh-oh.
(groans)
the one chain is slack.
(chain clinking)
I mean, I can see the chains
bouncing around here and all.
This load might be trying
to fall off.
Narrator: With 100 miles still
to go
and every bump pushing
the chains to the limit,
(truck rattles)
the veteran will have his
hands full.
Alex: It's gonna be about ten
hours of bumping up and down.
That causes another element
of potential disaster.
If I spend all my time
watching the load,
I can't watch the road.
This is a time when I need eyes
in the back of my head
so I can be looking forward
and backward at the same time.
(load creaking)
good lord hates a coward.
Help me, lord, to have a good
constructive trip,
and we get home in one piece.
Amen.
♪♪♪
narrator: 100 miles
to the southeast...
(truck honks)
yeah, this road's gone right
to (bleep) down here, man.
This is the beginning of the
end for this road, buddy.
Narrator: Fellow polar driver,
t burke,
is also battling a newly
opened trail.
(truck rattles)
- I'd like to pull it off
as quick as I can, right.
Before everything melts.
Narrator: Art's looking
to deliver 20 tons
of building supplies
bound for distant pauingassi,
a 200 mile trail
across northern manitoba.
♪♪♪
- we gotta get it in here, man.
Narrator: The cold front
may have allowed the road
to be opened,
but with each passing minute...
(truck rattles)
narrator: ...Its expiration date
is rapidly approaching.
♪♪♪
- this road certainly took
a turn for the worst
pretty (bleep) fast.
(truck rattles)
I gotta be on the ball here now.
(smash)
(engine hums)
oh dear, (bleep) look at this.
Look at this, look at this,
look at this, look at this.
I can't get stuck here, b'y.
If we get stuck here
we're (bleep).
(engine hums)
he needs to be pulled
front ways, b'y.
I don't know
if I can handle this one.
Let's get out and have a look.
(truck door shuts)
♪♪♪
- I'm art, b'y.
What's your name?
- Cliff?
Art: How long you been
at this, b'y?
- I'm not leaving you here, b'y.
We'll get you out.
Narrator: It's truckers code:
"never leave a driver
stranded."
art: He has to get out of here.
Narrator: So art will lend
a hand
even with another 100 miles
ahead of him.
(engine roars, chains clink)
art: I'm gonna go around him
and pull him frontwards.
(airbrakes hiss)
art: See if I can drag him
up this (bleep) hill
or at least out of there.
Narrator: Art rigs up
a makeshift tow line
out of a strap and chain
hoping it'll be strong enough
to pull the derailed truck
out of the ditch.
Art: We'll get him.
Okay.
♪♪♪
(chains clink)
(engine roars)
♪♪♪
(truck creaking)
- keep-- hey!
Turn your wheels this way.
(truck creaking)
(chains clink)
(engine roars)
narrator: The stuck rig ain't
going without a fight.
So art will back up try
to gain extra pulling power.
- Okay, let's go this time.
♪♪♪
(engine roars)
(chains clink)
(chain snaps)
- (bleep)! (bleep)! (bleep)!
Narrator: Fighting through
the long road to pauingassi...
Narrator: Attempting to rescue
a stranded trucker
from the ditch...
Art: Chain broke, eh.
Narrator: ...Art's makeshift
tow strap couldn't hold on.
Art: (bleep) sake.
It broke, buddy.
I gotta get out of here, b'y.
I gotta get out of here.
Narrator: With another
100 miles to motor through...
- Dang! We'll try her
one more time.
Narrator: ...Art gives it
all he's got
to try and get the driver free
so he can get back
to the long drive ahead.
- I didn't go through all this
to throw in the (bleep) towel.
(truck door shuts)
♪♪♪
art: Buddy, this time,
this is the biggy, b'y.
(engine hums)
♪♪♪
(chain clinks)
art: Come on, come on,
come on, come on, come on!
(engine roars)
♪♪♪
art: All right, buddy.
We got her.
(airbrakes hiss)
okay.
Narrator: Art, the good
samaritan, comes through.
Art: I wasn't leaving here
until I got you out, buddy.
You should be all right, buddy.
- Oh yeah, I will.
- Anyway we got him out.
I want to get the (bleep) out.
I wasted an hour here.
Narrator: But now with at least
10 hours of driving to go
the hard part's just beginning.
(truck door shuts)
(engine roars)
- (bleep). I've been sitting
here all day, man.
I gotta get the (bleep)
out of here.
I just-- hopefully
we'll (bleep) make it.
Narrator: With art looking
to make up time,
150 miles to the northwest
on the road to norway house...
♪♪♪
(engine hums)
(truck rattles)
- oh!
- just trying to keep my
forehead off the steering wheel.
Narrator: ...Hauling an oversize
16 ton fuel tank,
veteran, alex debogorski,
is still rocking and rolling.
(creaking)
(truck rattles)
- oh my goodness.
The good ole you got the sun
beating on it
and then the trucks come
and beat on it.
So the sun and the trucks
beat on it together
and they don't make it smoother
that's for sure.
♪♪♪
narrator: The road's starting
to melt down to bare muskeg
and up ahead...
- I'm gonna have an ice
crossing here.
Narrator: ...An ice crossing
just on the outskirts
of his destination
is melting too.
(squeaks to a halt,
airbrakes hiss)
(truck door shuts)
(footsteps crunch)
- well, the weathers warm.
Warmer than yesterday and...
We're out on the ice again.
(wind gusts)
you can see the road's starting
to let go,
starting to thaw.
This might be its last run.
This could be the end
of the road.
(wind gusts)
hopefully it's not my last run
right now traveling over it.
♪♪♪
nature doesn't have a calendar.
I mean, the ice can break
it doesn't have to be spring
but now that uh,
it's getting warmer
the ice is getting softer.
Narrator: The cold front
provided an opportunity
to get to norway house
but with the thermometer rising
alex will almost certainly be
the last truck to test the ice.
- Well, I'm the lu-lucky guy
that's gonna test this out
one more time.
Let's get it done.
(truck door shuts)
♪♪♪
you ready?
(creaking)
and we're off like a hurtle
of turtles.
(window squeaks)
(ice cracking)
that's some cracking
and popping, all right.
(ice cracking)
narrator: The splintering ice
isn't alex's only concern...
(chains clink)
...He's also gotta hope
the chains
keep the tank from
breaking away.
(chains clink)
alex: I see a little bit
of water on it too.
♪♪♪
oh, ho, ho,
the sun's coming out.
It's gonna start melting more.
All right, keep that sun
behind a cloud.
(ice cracking)
(chains clink)
narrator: To look for cracks
and open water
and to provide an escape route
if he breaks through,
alex takes a risk by standing
on the outer steps.
(ice cracking)
- you can hear the ice cracking
and popping.
(ice cracking)
almost hear the sharks down
there licking their chops.
(water gurgles)
it's a fairly lengthy uh,
lengthy bit of water.
(ice cracking)
well, this is just
a longer crossing
than we usually get
in manitoba--
whoa!
(wind gusts)
on the way to remote
norway house in manitoba...
Oh. Holy mackerel.
Holy mackerel.
Oh.
- I'm all right.
I'm okay.
Well, that was close.
Narrator: The oversize load's
got the ice cracking.
(ice cracking)
- I'm clumsy and it's slippery.
Narrator: And the ice roads
legend is shaken.
Alex: A little bit of ice here
on the step.
Almost ended up running
behind the truck.
Wouldn't have been
the first time
that somebody saw a truck
going down the ice,
the driver running behind it.
There is quite a few stories
like that.
(chains clink)
- yeah, so much for my low
blood pressure.
(ice cracking)
I can see the end,
I'm just about off.
Narrator: Norway house lies
just on the other side
but first alex must brave
the last 300 yards
where the ice
is at its thinnest.
(chains clink)
(truck creaking)
(ice cracking)
alex: Come on, baby.
(load groans)
♪♪♪
alex: There's about a hundred
feet to go.
We made it again.
This is pretty well
the last trip this uh,
this lake has in it
for this season.
(truck creaking)
narrator: The giant tank
hangs on
as alex survives the crossing.
Alex: I'm in norway house.
Narrator: And the old pro
comes through again.
Alex: Mission accomplished.
♪♪♪
narrator: While alex delivers,
200 miles to the east
in muskrat dam, ontario...
(whirring, beeping)
todd: Now that's a quick off
load right there.
That's how you're supposed
to do it.
Thanks, buddy.
Man: Yeah.
Narrator: ...Fellow polar
driver, todd dewey,
is locking in a delivery
of his own.
Todd: Another mission
accomplished.
Narrator: The first for the
remote village all season.
- (huffs)
narrator: But he's not off
the hook yet.
- Well, only one thing left
to do now, baby.
Narrator: The brief cold spells
fading fast
so it'll be a rush to get off
the 400 mile road
before it's shut down.
(truck rattles)
(truck creaking)
- this is just the beginning
of it too.
We got 400 kilometers of this
(bleep) to deal with.
♪♪♪
(engine roars)
(truck creaking)
todd: Whoa!
(skids)
♪♪♪
- this road is flat
and slippery.
If the temperature
is so warm outside
that the top layer of ice
is melting
and it is one slick sob
out here.
I mean, it is slick.
Not to mention bumpy
on top of it.
Narrator: Without weight
on the trailer
to give him added traction,
maintaining control on
the slick surface
is proving to be a challenge.
- Hold on.
(skids)
hang on!
(crash)
♪♪♪
- wow.
My goodness.
This road is bad.
This road is slick.
It is wet,
and it is creating definitely
a hard driving condition.
Narrator: But now...
Todd: Oh, I gotta do
the ice bridge.
Narrator: ...Things are about
to get even tougher.
Todd: Look at this ice bridge.
There's a bad spot
in the road right here.
Very bad spot.
(airbrakes hiss)
(beeping)
narrator: To create passageways
on the trail
over ditches and creeks,
road crews construct bridges
out of packed ice and snow.
Once the melt starts,
the bridges can collapse
taking big rigs with them.
(wind gusts)
todd: Here we go.
Damn.
(engine roars)
- hopefully, it'll just
get enough momentum
to kind of bump my way
through it here.
Hold on.
This one's gonna be rough.
(thud)
todd: Whoa!
(engine roars)
♪♪♪
come on, move!
Dammit no!
That's it.
It broke through,
the truck went through.
The ice bridge
has fallen through.
We are stuck.
Narrator: Warming temperatures
have softened the ice bridge
and it may have just claimed
its first victim.
Todd: This snow bridge is bad
news right here.
These warm temperatures
have melted the ice bridge
during the day so bad
that the, the bridge is
completely collapsed in.
(wind gusts)
♪♪♪
todd: Excuse my language
but I'm (bleep).
Narrator: While todd's bogged
down,
150 miles to the south...
♪♪♪
(engine hums)
(truck rattles)
- whoa, hang on.
Narrator: ...The competitions
right in the thick of it.
- Temperature's rising.
The road's going to (bleep).
Narrator: Darrell ward's
fighting to get to cat lake
with what might be the only haul
the village will see all season.
- These roads are definitely
getting slicker
with the sun beating on them.
(thud)
- oh!
We'll bounce the trailer off.
Definitely some bad spots
in the road.
- Partners.
- Nice.
Narrator: Since teaming up
with lisa kelly,
darrell: Well, we're almost
there.
We're almost to the end
of the road.
Narrator: The young company has
never shied away from any trail,
- oh, my gosh I made it.
- There's nobody else out here.
Narrator: No matter how far...
Narrator: ...Or how feared.
- Whoa.
Narrator: And this mission
might be the toughest one yet.
- It's a narrow road.
Narrator: The trail to cat lake
is an endless obstacle course
and first up...
- A lot of blind corners
and narrow road.
Narrator: ...Is a series
of tight twists and turns.
- Means disaster if you're not
paying attention.
(engine hums)
(truck rattles)
♪♪♪
darrell: Whoa.
(engine sputters)
(bleep) me.
I almost (bleep) pulled through
that, dammit.
Didn't realize that corner
was gonna be as sharp
as it was.
♪♪♪
(engine hums)
now I just gotta take a run
at it.
♪♪♪
well, I made it around
the corner.
Narrator: The turns are in
the rearview mirror...
- Narrow bridge.
Narrator: ...And now it's time
for the next challenge.
- Yeah that's a pretty
narrow bridge there.
Narrator: And this one comes
with a kicker...
- And then right after it
there's a (bleep) hill.
This bridge is no place
to (bleep) around.
You can slide off this (bleep)
bridge if you weren't careful.
(engine hums, bridge creaks)
♪♪♪
long as we can make it
up the hill here we got her.
Narrator: The 14% grade hill
comes right after a sharp turn.
So darrell will have
to scale it
without being able
to gain momentum.
Darrell: Come on, girl,
you can lug her up over this.
(engine hums)
(bleep).
Come on.
(chains clink, engine roars)
come on.
(engine sputters)
oh (bleep), don't stall.
Come on, you (bleep).
(tires spin, truck whines)
- (bleep)!
Narrator: Getting over
the incline won't be easy...
- I got a really sharp corner
at the bottom.
Well, I'm not gonna back down
and around that corner.
Narrator: ...With virtually
no straight road behind him
he's got no ability
to get a running start.
So I'm gonna throw a set
of chains on
and take off from right here.
Narrator: With no other option,
darrell will chain up whatever
added traction he can
and try and scale the incline
right from where he got stuck.
Darrell: I want to get off
of this hill.
Everything's warming up out here
and these roads are getting
slick.
If I can get up out of here it
won't be too big of a setback.
If I'm stuck here I'm (bleep).
(truck door shuts)
(gear grinds)
(engine roars)
I think I can make it.
I'm not getting any momentum.
Momentum is your friend.
♪♪♪
(chains clink)
yeah, we're slipping again.
(bleep).
(chains clink)
come on, don't do this to me,
you (bleep).
♪♪♪
(chains clink)
(bleep)!
This ain't fun.
I don't like it when this
(bleep) happens.
Narrator: Even for a seasoned
veteran like darrell,
the cat lake road is proving
to be a challenge.
- Well, we'll try her again.
Narrator: But with no help
around for miles
and the delivery on the line,
it's up to the renegade
to get the job done.
- I grabbed a little higher
gear
to get a little bit more
momentum.
(chains clink)
♪♪♪
I got another gear
and I've got momentum again.
(chains clink)
come on, girl,
you're almost to the top.
♪♪♪
just like that
that's how we do it.
Nothing gonna stop me but
that corner damn sure tried.
Nothing's stopping me this time.
Narrator: With the last big
obstacle behind him...
- Well, I'm coming into
cat lake here.
Narrator: ...Darrell's roller
coaster ride
finally comes to an end...
- Get it offloaded
and turn around
and get out of here.
Narrator: ...And he arrived
safely in cat lake.
(lever squeaks)
- one more load for the books.
It's getting warm outside.
They're lucky they got one load
in here.
Narrator: As darrell offloads,
50 miles to the northwest...
(engine hums)
todd: Come on, girl.
Narrator: ...The competition's
fighting to get back on the
road.
- Nope, we're gonna be stuck.
That's it.
Narrator: On his way back
to winnipeg...
- Just get enough momentum
to kind of bump my way
through it here.
Narrator: ...Todd tried to cross
a melting ice bridge...
(thud)
todd: Whoa!
(engine roars)
that's it.
It broke through,
the truck went through.
The ice bridge is falling
through.
Narrator: ...But it collapsed
under the weight of his rig
and trailer.
Now...
- The only thing I can do
is just rock the (bleep) out
of that truck
and pull myself out.
Narrator: ...Polar's top dog's
got a plan.
He'll chain up for added
traction
and use forward
and backward motion
to try and gain momentum.
A method known as 'rocking'.
(truck door shuts)
narrator: Now...
Todd: Here we go.
Narrator: ...Let there be rock.
(engine roars)
todd: Come on, girl.
♪♪♪
(shifts gears, engine roars)
todd: Come on, girl,
get traction. Come on!
♪♪♪
(engine roars)
todd: Makin' her.
Come on, keep going.
♪♪♪
(engine roars)
todd: Almost.
todd: Yee haw!
Got out. (relieved sigh)
we made her.
I don't know how but we did.
♪♪♪
man, that's horrible.
Did not expect to run into that.
Like I've said before,
one thing you can always be
certain about up here
is you can't be certain
of nothing.
Narrator: While todd heads
for winnipeg...
...Night falls on the winter
roads.
(engine hums)
art: I'm on the ice road here
booting into pauingassi.
I've never been on this road
before.
I'm not sure what to expect.
Narrator: Polar driver,
art burke,
is burning the midnight oil
desperately trying to reach
the distant town of pauingassi.
Art: I'm haulin' a load
of lumber.
This is the last load in here
for them this season.
Hopefully I'll get it in here.
Narrator: Art's already banked
over 150 miles
but with warm temperatures
expected in the morning
he's racing through the night
to complete the final 50.
Art: I wanna get as far
as I can in the dark hours
before the sun comes out.
The sun comes out tomorrow
this is gonna be (bleep).
This is the last trip in here
and they're gonna close this
any time.
You know, I'm surprised this
is not closed now
by the look of it
and the temperature.
I can't believe they're
sending me in here
to be totally honest with ya.
(truck rattles)
so I'm gonna kick my arse
in here.
See what happens.
♪♪♪
the road is terrible.
It's full of water
and it's full of mud
and it's thawing still.
Usually in the nighttime it's
supposed to be freezing, b'y.
It's not supposed to be going
on like this.
It's (bleep) near shorts
weather,
I'll have to show my physique,
eh.
I hate driving in the nighttime
with these skinny here roads
and all that (bleep)
'cause you can't see (bleep)
all, eh.
You can't see nothing, b'y.
Narrator: The road's already
falling apart.
Art: I can't see a thing.
Narrator: But it's also packing
a big surprise.
(thud)
- whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, buddy.
Holy (bleep), man,
look down there.
♪♪♪
(bleep), it's all (bleep) water.
(ice cracking)
this is on the ice, buddy.
This is all ice.
(wind gusts)
no warning, no sign
or (bleep) all, man.
All of a sudden we're on an ice
crossing in the pitch black.
This is something else,
ain't it?
Look at all the (bleep) pot
holes and everything in it.
Narrator: The ice has spent
the day
thawing in warm temperatures.
And under the cover
of darkness...
Art: It's dark so I can't see
what's happening.
Narrator: ...Art's unable
to spot the cracks
and open water that lie ahead.
Art: This is not good, eh.
(engine hums)
if I say bail
you (bleep) well bail.
(ice cracking)
(engine hums)
I wonder how long this
(bleep) is?
We'll be lucky if we get
the (bleep) out of this.
I'm not too happy about this
ice crossing.
At all, at all, at all.
All water, b'y.
Narrator: The disintegrating
surface
is under pressure supporting
art's haul.
- I've crossed some (bleep) ice
crossings in my (bleep) day,
but this one probably takes
the (bleep) cake.
Narrator: And if the truck
breaks through
it's a deadly 100 foot drop.
Art: This is all thawed out
and full of (bleep) water
and there's ruts in it
and (bleep) holes in it
and everything else, man.
It's probably thawing
as we speak.
(ice cracking)
believe it or not here we're at
the end of this (bleep) thing.
So I'm just hoping that nothing
nuts is gonna happen.
(ice cracking)
come on, come on,
come on, come on!
(ice cracking)
♪♪♪
okay, b'y.
Thank (bleep)
we're out of there.
Narrator: Art makes it across.
- Well, I can't say
I'm not happy
to get the (bleep) off of that.
(thud)
well, well, well, well,
well, well, well.
All right, away we go again.
Narrator: And as the sun rises
throughout the north...
(engine hums)
- okay, buddy.
Now believe it or not
we're here.
Narrator: ...Art delivers what's
likely
the last load for the village
of pauingassi.
- My, my, my.
On a one to ten that road
was terrible.
Road's are (bleep), man.
It's thawing out.
Narrator: And despite the
arrival of the early melt...
Art: Thank you, buddy.
Man: Yeah.
Narrator: ...The ice road
truckers aren't ready
to quit anytime soon.
Art: I'm in pauingassi, man.
The load is unloaded.
It's this community's last load
this year.
I'm glad I, I got to do it.
And now I'm all straightened
out here
and I'll be able to kick
(bleep),
and go back to winnipeg
and get another load.
(wind gusts)
narrator: The driver's are
heading into the final stretch
of the season...
(truck rattles)
alex: Whoa!
- Yee haw!
Narrator: ...And the melt
is coming fast and furious.
Lisa: I can't get stuck here.
Steph: Holy crap, man,
these cracks are unreal.
(ice cracking)
oh my god!
Todd: What in the hell?
That sucks.
Narrator: All bets are off...
Mark: Darrell ward and mark.
This is gonna be interesting.
Art: Broke down
on the (bleep) ice.
This is a nightmare.
Narrator: ...As the action
heats up...
Lisa: Oh no!
Narrator: ...Like never before.
(coughing)
darrell: Holy (bleep).
Mark: Stop the (bleep) truck.